"Sri Jagadisa Pandita is the saviour of the world. He distributes the nectar of love of Krsna just like a dense mass of dark clouds in the sky distributes rainfall." [C.C. Adi 11.30]

Sri Jagadisa Bhatta took his birth in the region of Gaihati. His father's name was Sri Kamalaksa Bhatta, who was the son of Bhatta Narayana, who hailed from Goyghar Bandyaghata. Both the mother and father of Jagadisa were very devoted Visnu-bhaktas. After his parents passed away he came with his wife to live on the banks of the Ganges. His wife's name was Dukhini devi. (His younger brother Mahesa also came with him to reside on the banks of the Ganga.)They built their house near the home of Jagannatha Misra.

Sri Gaura sundara instructed Jagadisa to preach Hari Nam at Nilacala. Thus he took shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Jagannatha. At that time he prayed at the feet of Lord Jagannatha and was rewarded by obtaining a Deity of the lotus-eyed Lord. This he brought to Yasora, on the banks of the Ganga near Cakdaha. This Deity was brought suspended from a staff which is still being worshiped in the temple of Lord Jagannatha at Jasora. This temple is presently under the charge of Sri Gaudiya Math, and is a rickshaw ride away from Cakdaha railway station, on the Sealdah-Krsnanagar line.

Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityananda sometimes used to go to Jasora to have festivals of sankirtana. Jagadisa Pandita's son was Sri Rambhadra Gosvami. In the temple are Deities of Sri Jagannatha Deva, Sri Radha-Vallabhaji and Sri Goura-Gopala. It is said that the Goura Gopala Deity was established by Sri Duhkhini Devi. The Deity is a golden color.

After Lord Caitanya conducted a sankirtan festival at the home of Jagadisa Pandita, He planned to go to Nilacala. Duhkhini, however, knowing the Lord's mind, was very distressed by feelings of impending separation. At that time Mahaprabhu gave her this Deity and said, "I will eternally remain in your house in the form of this Deity." From that day this Deity of Gaura-Gopala is being worshiped there. In Gaur-ganoddesa-dipika it is revealed that Jagadisa and Hiranya were wives of the Vedic brahmanas in Krsna lila. According to another opinion, "He who was previously known as Candrahasa, a famous dancer in Krsna-lila, is now famous as Jagadisa Pandita, who also takes great pleasure in ecstatic dancing."

On one Ekadasi day, the young Sri Gaura Hari wanted to eat rice from the house of Jagadisa and Hiranya. The Lord said to His parents, "If you don't want Me to die, then immediately go to the house of two brahmanas by the names of Jagadisa and Hiranya, with whom I am very pleased. They are both fasting for Ekadasi, but they have prepared some offerings for Lord Visnu. If you can obtain some of that Visnu-prasada then I'll recover my health and be able to move about." [C.B. Adi 6.20-23] One day, child Gaura Hari was crying incessantly. His parents told him, "First tell us what you want. We'll bring it, but please don't cry."

He replied, "On this Ekadasi day in Jagadisa and Hiranya's house are many preparations of Visnu-prasada. If I can eat that then I'll be alright."

Hearing this impossible request of her son, Saci Mata put her hand on her head and began to lament. Upon hearing the words of the child, the neighbours laughed in amazement. "How is it that such a young child as this is aware that today is Ekadasi?"

Then the ladies told Him, "Bap Nimai, don't cry anymore, we'll bring what you have requested." When the two brahmanas heard of the child's request they were very pleased. Both of them were very intimate friends of Jagannath Misra and they were well aware that the Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Hari had appeared in his house. Therefore, whatever they had prepared for Lord Hari they brought before Sri Gaura Hari and told Him, "Bap, Visvambhara! We have brought everything which You requested. Now please eat it in great happiness and don't cry anymore."