Born in a dynasty of Vaishnavas, Raghunatha Dasa Goswami was the only son of a wealthy land owner. As a boy, he received Haridasa Thakura's association and blessings. At fifteen he met Lord Chaitanya. By the mercy of Lord Nityananda he renounced a beautiful wife and an opulent family. He ran to Jagannatha Puri to intimately serve Shri Gaura Raya and his siksha guru Svarupa Damodara Goswami for sixteen years. Lord Gauranga gave His personal Govardhana Shila and gunja mala to Raghunatha Dasa Goswami.
 
   Raghunatha Dasa couldn't live after Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu left this world. So, he came to Vrindavana to end his life by jumping off Govardhana Hill. Shri Rupa and Sanatana Goswamis affectionately received him. They convinced him to live on and enlighten all the Vrajavasi Vaishnavas with Shriman Mahaprabhu's Puri pastimes. For three hours a day on the banks of Radha-kunda he spoke about Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.
 
   Raghunatha Dasa did Radha-Krishna bhajana at Radha-kunda for forty years. He lived an austere life of pure devotion. Raghunatha Dasa Goswami showed the standard of renunciation required to attain the eternal loving service of Radha-Giridhari in the nitya nikunja lilas at Radha-kunda, His perfect example enthuses all Gaudiya Vaishnavas to develop unalloyed pure love for Radha-Krishna.
   Shri Raghunatha Dasa Goswami's daily bhajana included: chanting 64 rounds japa (1,00,000 Holy Names); doing manasi-seva in his spiritual body; worshiping Govardhana Shila; bathing thrice in Radha-kunda; offering one-thousand obeisances to Krishna; offering two-thousand to Vaishnavas and embracing them; resting ninety minutes, and some days not at all; Keep in mind however, when an eternal associate of the Lord externally rests, internally he continues serving. He ate only one leaf cup (100 grams) of buttermilk daily.
   Throughout his life he never ate anything for sense gratification. He took the bare minimum to keep body and soul together. It's said that after the disappearance of Lord Chaitanya Raghunatha Dasa ate only fruit and milk. After Shri Sanatana Goswamipada left he existed on a leaf cup of buttermilk every day or two. And when Shri Rupa Goswami entered nitya-lila Raghunatha gave up all eating and drinking! He was slowly burning in the fire of separation from the Lord and His loving servants. The Vrajavasis would cry upon seeing his weakened condition.
   Shri Raghunatha Dasa Goswami wrote three books; Stavavalli (contains Manah Shiksha, Vilapa-kusumanjali and more), Mukta-charita, Dana Keli Chintamani. In Jaiva Dharma, Shrila Thakura Bhaktivinoda said, "Raghunatha Dasa Goswami showed the esoteric method of engaging oneself in the loving service of Shri-Shri Radha-Krishna." Raghunatha Dasa wrote and taught that the divine service of Shrimati Radharani in Vrindavana is the topmost spiritual perfection. For this he was known as the prayojana acharya, the teacher who reveals the highest fulfillment in life.
   Raghunatha Dasa Goswami clearly established the supremacy of Shrimati Radharani. In Vilapa-kusumanjali, a collection of intimate prayers, he states that Shri Radha's service is the highest attainment. Feeling extreme impatience and hopelessness, due to separation from the "Queen of his life," he desperately prays for Radharani's service:
   "My life is worthless. I will give it up without receiving Your mercy. Living in Radha-kunda and Vrindavana is meaningless to me. To say nothing of Vrindavana, even Krishna Himself is useless to me without You. 0 Shrimati Radharani, You are the only object of my life. Please be merciful to me. Crying profusely in great lamentation, I hold Your lotus feet to my heart and beg for Your loving service. May this Vilapa-kusumanjali bring even the slightest satisfaction to You."
   Shrila Raghunatha Dasa serves Shri Radha as Rati-manjari in Shri Vrindavana-dhama. His samadhi is at Radha-kunda and the 64 Samadhis Area. 