The Supreme Lord has three different internal saktis (potencies), Sri, Bhu and Nita. Bhu sakti appeared as Srimati Vishnupriya Devi in Gaura lila to assist Sri Caitanya's sankirtana movement. King Satrajit, the father of Satyabhama in Krishna lila, appeared in Gauranga lila as the brahmana Sanatana Mishra, Vishnupriya Devi's father.
Srimati Vishnupriya Devi overflowed with all good qualities. Her beauty surpassed the goddess of fortune. She was devoted to her parents and dutifully followed scriptural injunctions. Regularly she worshiped Tulasi Devi, and observed vows of austerity such as bathing thrice daily in the Ganges.
 
Whenever she met Saci Mata at the Ganges Vishnupriya would humbly bow down at her feet. Saci Devi often thought that chaste beautiful Vishnupriya would make an ideal bride for her son Nimai. After Laxmipriya Devi, Lord Caitanya's first wife, "died in separation from the Lord," Nimai Pandit married Srimati Vishnupriya Devi. Caitanya Mangala and Caitanya Bhagavata give elaborate descriptions of this most auspicious wedding.
Buddhimanta Khan, a rich landowner, bore all expenses of the opulent royal wedding of the Divine Couple, Vishnupriya and Sri Nimai Pandit. All the people of Navadvipa and the neighboring villages came to the wedding. During the ceremony all eyes were on the Divine Couple,as if to devour the matchless beauty of Vishnupriya and Nimai Pandit.
The Vaisnavas sang Hari's glories. The brahmanas made a circle around the Lord and chanted the Vedas. A sea of joy flooded the four directions. Those who didn't drown simply floated in bliss. Besides the wedding, Vrindavana Dasa Thakura doesn't elaborate about Vishnupriya's pastimes.
 
In Caitanya Mangala, Locana Dasa Thakura tells pastimes not mentioned elsewhere. He narrates the especially touching last conversation Lord Gauranga had with Vishnupriya Devi the night before He took sannyasa:
"In a voice choked with emotion, Vishnupriya said, 'Tell me, 0 Prananatha (Lord of my life), is it true the rumor I heard that You will take sannyasa and leave me? If I lose Your association I might as well end my life by drinking poison.'
"Responding with gentle compassionate words, Sri Gaura Raya said, 'Vishnupriya, you are as dear to Me as life itself. There is no need to worry. Please hear what I am about to say; for it will help you. The only truth in this world is Bhagavan and the Vaisnavas. Everything else is illusion. Fathers, mothers, children, relationships between men and women are all illusory. Krishna is the master, the real husband of everyone. Don't lament, don't worry your nameis Vishnupriya. Therefore, fulfill the real meaning of Vishnupriya and always think of Krishna within your heart.'
 
"Then Sri Gaurasundara showed His four-armed form which helped Vishnupriya understand His absolute position. Seeing this vanquished Vishnupriya's grief and pain. She felt blissful. This vision and Mahaprabhu's instructions removed her bewilderment. But she kept the mentality of taking the Lord as her husband.
 
"Sobbing and falling at Lord Caitanya's feet, she said, 'I beg You to accept my humble submission. You are the most dear Lord of my life, my only wealth. Without You, without Your service 1 have nothing.'
 
"Lord Gauranga embraced Vishnupriya with His eyes. He gave her mercy with these words: 'I shall travel here and there. But wherever I go, I shall always remain at your place.'
"Understanding the supremely independent nature of Lord Gaura, Vishnupriya said, 'You must do what makes You happy my Lord. Let no one be an obstacle to Your divine mission."(Caitanya Mangala)
After Sri Nimai Pandit left Navadvipa, Vishnupriya adopted an austere and devoted life. She became as thin as the crescent moon before Amavasya (dark moon). Following a rigid sadhana (spiritual practice), she set aside one grain of rice for every round of Hare Krishna japa she chanted. In the evening, Vishnupriya Devi cooked these grains, offered them to her personal Deity of Mahaprabhu, and honored the remnants. Known today as Dhamesvara Mahaprabhu, Vishnupriya's gorgeous Deity of Sri Gauranga Mahaprabhu resides in Navadvipa city. Sriman Mahaprabhu receives regular worship and gives unlimited mercy.